alpha waves the relatively slow brain waves of a relaxed, awake state.

altruism unselfish regard for the welfare of others. 

amphetamines drugs that stimulate neural activity, causing speededup
body functions and associated energy and mood changes. 

amygdala [uh-MIG-duh-la] two lima-bean-sized neural clusters in the
limbic system; linked to emotion. 

anorexia nervosa an eating disorder in which a person (usually an
adolescent female) maintains a starvation diet despite being significantly
(15 percent or more) underweight. 

anterograde amnesia an inability to form new memories. 

antianxiety drugs drugs used to control anxiety and agitation. 

antidepressant drugs drugs used to treat depression and some anxiety
disorders. Different types work by altering the availability of various
neurotransmitters. 

antipsychotic drugs drugs used to treat schizophrenia and other forms
of severe thought disorder. 

antisocial personality disorder a personality disorder in which a person
(usually a man) exhibits a lack of conscience for wrongdoing,
even toward friends and family members. May be aggressive and
ruthless or a clever con artist. 

anxiety disorders psychological disorders characterized by distressing,
persistent anxiety or maladaptive behaviors that reduce anxiety.

aphasia impairment of language, usually caused by left-hemisphere
damage either to Broca's area (impairing speaking) or to Wernicke's
area (impairing understanding). 

applied research scientific study that aims to solve practical problems.

aptitude test a test designed to predict a person's future performance;
aptitude is the capacity to learn. 

assimilation interpreting our new experiences in terms of our existing
schemas. 

association areas areas of the cerebral cortex that are not involved
in primary motor or sensory functions; rather, they are involved in
higher mental functions such as learning, remembering, thinking,
and speaking. 

associative learning learning that certain events occur together.
The events may be two stimuli (as in classical conditioning) or
a response and its consequences (as in operant conditioning).

attachment an emotional tie with another person; shown in young
children by their seeking closeness to the caregiver and showing distress
on separation. 

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) a psychological
disorder marked by the appearance by age 7 of one or more of 3
key symptoms: extreme inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity.

attitude feelings, often influenced by our beliefs, that predispose us to
respond in a particular way to objects, people, and events. 

attribution theory the theory that we explain someone's behavior by
crediting either the situation or the person's disposition. 

audition the sense or act of hearing. 

absolute threshold the minimum stimulation needed to detect a particular
stimulus 50 percent of the time. 

accommodation adapting our current understandings (schemas) to
incorporate new information. 

accommodation the process by which the eye's lens changes shape to
focus near or far objects on the retina. 

achievement motivation a desire for significant accomplishment; for
mastery of skills or ideas; for rapidly attaining a high standard. 

achievement test a test designed to assess what a person has learned.

acquisition in classical conditioning, the initial stage, when one links
a neutral stimulus and an unconditioned stimulus so that the neutral
stimulus begins triggering the conditioned response. In operant
conditioning, the strengthening of a reinforced response. 

action potential a neural impulse; a brief electrical charge that travels
down an axon. 

active listening empathic listening in which the listener echoes, restates,
and clarifies. A feature of Rogers' client-centered therapy. 

adaptation-level phenomenon our tendency to form judgments (of
sounds, of lights, of income) relative to a neutral level defined by our
prior experience. 

addiction compulsive drug craving and use, despite adverse consequences.

adolescence the transition period from childhood to adulthood, extending
from puberty to independence. 

adrenal [ah-DREEN-el] glands a pair of endocrine glands that sit just
above the kidneys and secrete hormones (epinephrine and norepinephrine)
that help arouse the body in times of stress. 

aerobic exercise sustained exercise that increases heart and lung fitness;
may also alleviate depression and anxiety. 

aggression any physical or verbal behavior intended to hurt or destroy.

alcohol dependence (popularly known as alcoholism). Alcohol use
marked by tolerance, withdrawal if suspended, and a drive to continue
use. 

algorithm a methodical, logical rule or procedure that guarantees
solving a particular problem. Contrasts with the usually speedier—
but also more error-prone—use of heuristics. 

biopsychosocial approach an integrated approach that incorporates
biological, psychological, and social-cultural levels of analysis. 

bipolar disorder a mood disorder in which a person alternates between
the hopelessness and lethargy of depression and the overexcited state
of mania. (Formerly called manic-depressive disorder.) 

blind spot the point at which the optic nerve leaves the eye, creating
a "blind" spot because no receptor cells are located there. 

blindsight a condition in which a person can respond to a visual stimulus
without consciously experiencing it. 

bottom-up processing analysis that begins with the sensory receptors
and works up to the brain's integration of sensory information. 

brainstem the oldest part and central core of the brain, beginning
where the spinal cord swells as it enters the skull; the brainstem is
responsible for automatic survival functions. 

Broca's area controls language expression—an area of the frontal lobe,
usually in the left hemisphere, that directs the muscle movements
involved in speech. 

bulimia nervosa an eating disorder in which a person alternates binge
eating (usually of high-calorie foods) with purging (by vomiting or
laxative use), fasting, or excessive exercise. 

bystander effect the tendency for any given bystander to be less likely
to give aid if other bystanders are present. 

Cannon-Bard theory the theory that an emotion-arousing stimulus simultaneously
triggers (1) physiological responses and (2) the subjective
experience of emotion. 

case study an observation technique in which one person is studied in
depth in the hope of revealing universal principles. 

catharsis emotional release. In psychology, the catharsis hypothesis
maintains that "releasing" aggressive energy (through action or fantasy)
relieves aggressive urges. 

central nervous system (CNS) the brain and spinal cord. 

central route persuasion occurs when interested people focus on the
arguments and respond with favorable thoughts. 

cerebellum [sehr-uh-BELL-um] the "little brain" at the rear of the
brainstem; functions include processing sensory input and coordinating
movement output and balance. 

cerebral [seh-REE-bruhl] cortex the intricate fabric of interconnected
neural cells covering the cerebral hemispheres; the body's ultimate
control and information-processing center. 

change blindness failing to notice changes in the environment. 

chromosomes threadlike structures made of DNA molecules that contain
the genes. 

chunking organizing items into familiar, manageable units; often occurs
automatically. 

circadian [ser-KAY-dee-an] rhythm the biological clock; regular
bodily rhythms (for example, of temperature and wakefulness) that
occur on a 24-hour cycle. 

classical conditioning a type of learning in which one learns to link
two or more stimuli and anticipate events. 

client-centered therapy a humanistic therapy, developed by Carl Rogers,
in which the therapist uses techniques such as active listening
within a genuine, accepting, empathic environment to facilitate clients'
growth. (Also called person-centered therapy.) 

autism a disorder that appears in childhood and is marked by deficient
communication, social interaction, and understanding of others'
states of mind. 

automatic processing unconscious encoding of incidental information,
such as space, time, and frequency, and of well-learned information,
such as word meanings. 

autonomic [aw-tuh-NAHM-ik] nervous system (ANS) the part of the
peripheral nervous system that controls the glands and the muscles
of the internal organs (such as the heart). Its sympathetic division
arouses; its parasympathetic division calms. 

availability heuristic estimating the likelihood of events based on
their availability in memory; if instances come readily to mind (perhaps
because of their vividness), we presume such events are common.

aversive conditioning a type of counterconditioning that associates an
unpleasant state (such as nausea) with an unwanted behavior (such
as drinking alcohol). 

axon the neuron extension that passes messages through its branches
to other neurons or to muscles or glands. 

babbling stage beginning at about 4 months, the stage of speech development
in which the infant spontaneously utters various sounds
at first unrelated to the household language. 

barbiturates drugs that depress central nervous system activity, reducing
anxiety but impairing memory and judgment. 

basal metabolic rate the body's resting rate of energy expenditure.

basic research pure science that aims to increase the scientific knowledge
base. 

basic trust according to Erik Erikson, a sense that the world is predictable
and trustworthy; said to be formed during infancy by appropriate
experiences with responsive caregivers. 

behavior genetics the study of the relative power and limits of genetic
and environmental influences on behavior. 

behavior therapy therapy that applies learning principles to the elimination
of unwanted behaviors. 

behaviorism the view that psychology (1) should be an objective
science that (2) studies behavior without reference to mental processes.
Most research psychologists today agree with (1) but not
with (2). 

belief perseverance clinging to one's initial conceptions after the basis
on which they were formed has been discredited. 

binge-eating disorder significant binge-eating episodes, followed by
distress, disgust, or guilt, but without the compensatory purging,
fasting, or excessive exercise that marks bulimia nervosa. 

binocular cues depth cues, such as retinal disparity, that depend on
the use of two eyes. 

biological perspective concerned with the links between biology
and behavior. Includes psychologists working in neuroscience, behavior
genetics, and evolutionary psychology. These researchers
may call themselves behavioral neuroscientists, neuropsychologists,
behavior geneticists, physiological psychologists, or biopsychologists.

biomedical therapy prescribed medications or procedures that act directly
on the person's physiology. 

conditioned reinforcer a stimulus that gains its reinforcing power
through its association with a primary reinforcer; also known as a
secondary reinforcer. 

conditioned response (CR) in classical conditioning, a learned response
to a previously neutral (but now conditioned) stimulus (CS).

conditioned stimulus (CS) in classical conditioning, an originally irrelevant
stimulus that, after association with an unconditioned stimulus
(US), comes to trigger a conditioned response (CR). 

conduction hearing loss hearing loss caused by damage to the
mechanical system that conducts sound waves to the cochlea.

cones retinal receptor cells that are concentrated near the center of
the retina and that function in daylight or in well-lit conditions. The
cones detect fine detail and give rise to color sensations. 

confirmation bias a tendency to search for information that supports
our preconceptions and to ignore or distort contradictory evidence.

conflict a perceived incompatibility of actions, goals, or ideas. 

conformity adjusting our behavior or thinking to coincide with a
group standard. 

confounding variable a factor other than the independent variable
that might produce an effect in an experiment. 

consciousness our awareness of ourselves and our environment. 

conservation the principle (which Piaget believed to be a part of concrete
operational reasoning) that properties such as mass, volume,
and number remain the same despite changes in the forms of objects.

content validity the extent to which a test samples the behavior that is
of interest. 

continuous reinforcement reinforcing the desired response every
time it occurs. 

control group in an experiment, the group that is not exposed to the
treatment; contrasts with the experimental group and serves as a
comparison for evaluating the effect of the treatment. 

coping alleviating stress using emotional, cognitive, or behavioral
methods. 

coronary heart disease the clogging of the vessels that nourish the
heart muscle; the leading cause of death in many developed countries.

corpus callosum [KOR-pus kah-LOW-sum] the large band of neural
fibers connecting the two brain hemispheres and carrying messages
between them. 

correlation a measure of the extent to which two factors vary together,
and thus of how well either factor predicts the other. 

correlation coefficient a statistical index of the relationship between
two things (from -1 to +1). 

counseling psychology a branch of psychology that assists people with
problems in living (often related to school, work, or marriage) and in
achieving greater well-being. 

counterconditioning a behavior therapy procedure that uses classical
conditioning to evoke new responses to stimuli that are triggering
unwanted behaviors; includes exposure therapies and aversive conditioning.

clinical psychology a branch of psychology that studies, assesses, and
treats people with psychological disorders. 

cochlea [KOHK-lee-uh] a coiled, bony, fluid-filled tube in the inner
ear; sound waves traveling through the cochlear fluid trigger nerve
impulses. 

cochlear implant a device for converting sounds into electrical signals
and stimulating the auditory nerve through electrodes threaded into
the cochlea. 

cognition all the mental activities associated with thinking, knowing,
remembering, and communicating. 

cognitive dissonance theory the theory that we act to reduce the discomfort
(dissonance) we feel when two of our thoughts (cognitions)
are inconsistent. For example, when we become aware that our attitudes
and our actions clash, we can reduce the resulting dissonance
by changing our attitudes. 

cognitive learning the acquisition of mental information, whether by
observing events, by watching others, or through language. 

cognitive map a mental representation of the layout of one's environment.
For example, after exploring a maze, rats act as if they have
learned a cognitive map of it. 

cognitive neuroscience the interdisciplinary study of the brain activity
linked with cognition (including perception, thinking, memory,
and language). 

cognitive therapy therapy that teaches people new, more adaptive
ways of thinking; based on the assumption that thoughts intervene
between events and our emotional reactions. 

cognitive-behavioral therapy a popular integrative therapy that combines
cognitive therapy (changing self-defeating thinking) with behavior
therapy (changing behavior). 

cohort a group of people from a given time period. 

collective unconscious Carl Jung's concept of a shared, inherited reservoir
of memory traces from our species' history. 

collectivism giving priority to goals of one's group (often one's extended
family or work group) and defining one's identity accordingly.

color constancy perceiving familiar objects as having consistent color,
even if changing illumination alters the wavelengths reflected by
the object. 

community psychology a branch of psychology that studies how people
interact with their social environments and how social institutions
affect individuals and groups. 

companionate love the deep affectionate attachment we feel for those
with whom our lives are intertwined. 

complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) as yet unproven health
care treatments intended to supplement (complement) or serve as alternatives
to conventional medicine, and which typically are not widely taught
in medical schools, used in hospitals, or reimbursed by insurance companies.
When research shows a therapy to be safe and effective, it usually
then becomes part of accepted medical practice. 

concept a mental grouping of similar objects, events, ideas, or people.

concrete operational stage in Piaget's theory, the stage of cognitive
development (from about 6 or 7 to 11 years of age) during which
children gain the mental operations that enable them to think logically
about concrete events. 

dissociative identity disorder (DID) a rare dissociative disorder in
which a person exhibits two or more distinct and alternating personalities.
Formerly called multiple personality disorder. 

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) a complex molecule containing the genetic
information that makes up the chromosomes. 

double-blind procedure an experimental procedure in which both
the research participants and the research staff are ignorant (blind)
about whether the research participants have received the treatment
or a placebo. Commonly used in drug-evaluation studies.

Down syndrome a condition of mild to severe intellectual disability
and associated physical disorders caused by an extra copy of chromosome
21. 

dream a sequence of images, emotions, and thoughts passing through
a sleeping person's mind. Dreams are notable for their hallucinatory
imagery, discontinuities, and incongruities, and for the dreamer's
delusional acceptance of the content and later difficulties remembering
it. 

drive-reduction theory the idea that a physiological need creates an
aroused tension state (a drive) that motivates an organism to satisfy
the need. 

DSM-IV-TR the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, with an updated
"text revision"; a widely used system for classifying psychological
disorders. 

dual processing the principle that information is often simultaneously
processed on separate conscious and unconscious tracks. 

echoic memory a momentary sensory memory of auditory stimuli; if
attention is elsewhere, sounds and words can still be recalled within
3 or 4 seconds. 

eclectic approach an approach to psychotherapy that, depending on
the client's problems, uses techniques from various forms of therapy.

Ecstasy (MDMA) a synthetic stimulant and mild hallucinogen. Produces
euphoria and social intimacy, but with short-term health risks
and longer-term harm to serotonin-producing neurons and to mood
and cognition. 

effortful processing encoding that requires attention and conscious
effort. 

ego the largely conscious, "executive" part of personality that, according
to Freud, mediates among the demands of the id, superego, and
reality. The ego operates on the reality principle, satisfying the id's
desires in ways that will realistically bring pleasure rather than pain.

egocentrism in Piaget's theory, the preoperational child's difficulty
taking another's point of view. 

electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) a biomedical therapy for severely
depressed patients in which a brief electric current is sent through
the brain of an anesthetized patient. 

electroencephalogram (EEG) an amplified recording of the waves of
electrical activity that sweep across the brain's surface. These waves
are measured by electrodes placed on the scalp. 

embodied cognition in psychological science, the influence of bodily
sensations, gestures, and other states on cognitive preferences and
judgments. 

creativity the ability to produce novel and valuable ideas. 

critical period an optimal period early in the life of an organism when
exposure to certain stimuli or experiences produces normal development.

critical thinking thinking that does not blindly accept arguments and
conclusions. Rather, it examines assumptions, discerns hidden values,
evaluates evidence, and assesses conclusions. 

cross-sectional study a study in which people of different ages are
compared with one another. 

crystallized intelligence our accumulated knowledge and verbal
skills; tends to increase with age. 

culture the enduring behaviors, ideas, attitudes, values, and traditions
shared by a group of people and transmitted from one generation to
the next. 

debriefing the postexperimental explanation of a study, including its
purpose and any deceptions, to its participants. 

deep processing encoding semantically, based on the meaning of the
words; tends to yield the best retention. 

defense mechanisms in psychoanalytic theory, the ego's protective
methods of reducing anxiety by unconsciously distorting reality.

deindividuation the loss of self-awareness and self-restraint occurring
in group situations that foster arousal and anonymity. 

déjà vu that eerie sense that "I've experienced this before." Cues from
the current situation may subconsciously trigger retrieval of an earlier
experience. 

delta waves the large, slow brain waves associated with deep sleep.

delusions false beliefs, often of persecution or grandeur, that may accompany
psychotic disorders. 

dendrites a neuron's bushy, branching extensions that receive messages
and conduct impulses toward the cell body. 

dependent variable the outcome factor; the variable that may change
in response to manipulations of the independent variable. 

depressants drugs (such as alcohol, barbiturates, and opiates) that reduce
neural activity and slow body functions. 

depth perception the ability to see objects in three dimensions although
the images that strike the retina are two-dimensional; allows
us to judge distance. 

developmental psychology a branch of psychology that studies physical,
cognitive, and social change throughout the life span. 

difference threshold the minimum difference between two stimuli
required for detection 50 percent of the time. We experience the
difference threshold as a just noticeable difference (or jnd). 

discrimination in classical conditioning, the learned ability to distinguish
between a conditioned stimulus and stimuli that do not signal
an unconditioned stimulus. 

discrimination unjustifiable negative behavior toward a group and its
members. 

dissociation a split in consciousness, which allows some thoughts and
behaviors to occur simultaneously with others. 

dissociative disorders disorders in which conscious awareness becomes
separated (dissociated) from previous memories, thoughts,
and feelings. 

extinction the diminishing of a conditioned response; occurs in classical
conditioning when an unconditioned stimulus (US) does not
follow a conditioned stimulus (CS); occurs in operant conditioning
when a response is no longer reinforced. 

extrasensory perception (ESP) the controversial claim that perception
can occur apart from sensory input; includes telepathy, clairvoyance,
and precognition. 

extrinsic motivation a desire to perform a behavior to receive promised
rewards or avoid threatened punishment. 

facial feedback effect the tendency of facial muscle states to trigger
corresponding feelings such as fear, anger, or happiness. 

factor analysis a statistical procedure that identifies clusters of related
items (called factors) on a test; used to identify different dimensions
of performance that underlie a person's total score. 

family therapy therapy that treats the family as a system. Views an individual's
unwanted behaviors as influenced by, or directed at, other
family members. 

feature detectors nerve cells in the brain that respond to specific features
of the stimulus, such as shape, angle, or movement. 

feel-good, do-good phenomenon people's tendency to be helpful
when already in a good mood. 

fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) physical and cognitive abnormalities
in children caused by a pregnant woman's heavy drinking. In
severe cases, symptoms include noticeable facial misproportions.

fetus the developing human organism from 9 weeks after conception
to birth. 

figure-ground the organization of the visual field into objects (the figures)
that stand out from their surroundings (the ground). 

fixation according to Freud, a lingering focus of pleasure-seeking energies
at an earlier psychosexual stage, in which conflicts were unresolved.

fixed-interval schedule in operant conditioning, a reinforcement
schedule that reinforces a response only after a specified time has
elapsed. 

fixed-ratio schedule in operant conditioning, a reinforcement schedule
that reinforces a response only after a specified number of responses.

flashbulb memory a clear memory of an emotionally significant moment
or event. 

flow a completely involved, focused state of consciousness, with diminished
awareness of self and time, resulting from optimal engagement
of one's skills. 

fluid intelligence our ability to reason speedily and abstractly; tends to
decrease during late adulthood. 

fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) a technique for revealing bloodflow and,
therefore, brain activity by comparing successive MRI scans. fMRI
scans show brain function. 

foot-in-the-door phenomenon the tendency for people who have
first agreed to a small request to comply later with a larger request.

formal operational stage in Piaget's theory, the stage of cognitive development
(normally beginning about age 12) during which people
begin to think logically about abstract concepts. 

embryo the developing human organism from about 2 weeks after fertilization
through the second month. 

emerging adulthood for some people in modern cultures, a period
from the late teens to mid-twenties, bridging the gap between adolescent
dependence and full independence and responsible adulthood.

emotion a response of the whole organism, involving (1) physiological
arousal, (2) expressive behaviors, and (3) conscious experience. 

emotional intelligence the ability to perceive, understand, manage,
and use emotions. 

emotion-focused coping attempting to alleviate stress by avoiding or
ignoring a stressor and attending to emotional needs related to one's
stress reaction. 

empirically derived test a test (such as the MMPI) developed by testing
a pool of items and then selecting those that discriminate between
groups. 

encoding the processing of information into the memory system—for
example, by extracting meaning. 

endocrine [EN-duh-krin] system the body's "slow" chemical communication
system; a set of glands that secrete hormones into the
bloodstream. 

endorphins [en-DOR-fins] "morphine within"-natural, opiatelike
neurotransmitters linked to pain control and to pleasure. 

environment every nongenetic influence, from prenatal nutrition to
the people and things around us. 

epigenetics the study of influences on gene expression that occur
without a DNA change. 

equity a condition in which people receive from a relationship in proportion
to what they give to it. 

estrogens sex hormones, such as estradiol, secreted in greater amounts
by females than by males and contributing to female sex characteristics.
In nonhuman female mammals, estrogen levels peak during
ovulation, promoting sexual receptivity. 

evidence-based practice clinical decision making that integrates the
best available research with clinical expertise and patient characteristics
and preferences. 

evolutionary psychology the study of the evolution of behavior and
the mind, using principles of natural selection. 

experiment a research method in which an investigator manipulates
one or more factors (independent variables) to observe the effect
on some behavior or mental process (the dependent variable). By
random assignment of participants, the experimenter aims to control
other relevant factors. 

experimental group in an experiment, the group that is exposed to
the treatment, that is, to one version of the independent variable.

explicit memory memory of facts and experiences that one can
consciously know and "declare." (Also called declarative memory.)

exposure therapies behavioral techniques, such as systematic desensitization
and virtual reality exposure therapy, that treat anxieties by
exposing people (in imagination or actual situations) to the things
they fear and avoid. 

external locus of control the perception that chance or outside forces
beyond your personal control determine your fate. 

glial cells (glia) cells in the nervous system that support, nourish, and
protect neurons; they may also play a role in learning and thinking.

glucose the form of sugar that circulates in the blood and provides the
major source of energy for body tissues. When its level is low, we feel
hunger. 

grammar in a language, a system of rules that enables us to communicate
with and understand others. In a given language, semantics is
the set of rules for deriving meaning from sounds, and syntax is the
set of rules for combining words into grammatically sensible sentences.

GRIT Graduated and Reciprocated Initiatives in Tension-Reduction-a
strategy designed to decrease international tensions. 

group polarization the enhancement of a group's prevailing inclinations
through discussion within the group. 

group therapy therapy conducted with groups rather than individuals,
permitting therapeutic benefits from group interaction. 

grouping the perceptual tendency to organize stimuli into coherent
groups. 

groupthink the mode of thinking that occurs when the desire for harmony
in a decision-making group overrides a realistic appraisal of
alternatives. 

habituation decreasing responsiveness with repeated stimulation. As
infants gain familiarity with repeated exposure to a visual stimulus,
their interest wanes and they look away sooner. 

hallucinations false sensory experiences, such as seeing something in
the absence of an external visual stimulus. 

hallucinogens psychedelic ("mind-manifesting") drugs, such as LSD,
that distort perceptions and evoke sensory images in the absence of
sensory input. 

health psychology a subfield of psychology that provides psychology's
contribution to behavioral medicine. 

heritability the proportion of variation among individuals that we can
attribute to genes. The heritability of a trait may vary, depending on
the range of populations and environments studied. 

heuristic a simple thinking strategy that often allows us to make judgments
and solve problems efficiently; usually speedier but also more
error-prone than algorithms. 

hierarchy of needs Maslow's pyramid of human needs, beginning at
the base with physiological needs that must first be satisfied before
higher-level safety needs and then psychological needs become active.

higher-order conditioning a procedure in which the conditioned
stimulus in one conditioning experience is paired with a new neutral
stimulus, creating a second (often weaker) conditioned stimulus.
For example, an animal that has learned that a tone predicts
food might then learn that a light predicts the tone and begin
responding to the light alone. (Also called second-order conditioning.)

hindsight bias the tendency to believe, after learning an outcome, that
one would have foreseen it. (Also known as the I-knew-it-all-along
phenomenon.) 

hippocampus a neural center located in the limbic system; helps process
explicit memories for storage. 

fovea the central focal point in the retina, around which the eye's
cones cluster. 

framing the way an issue is posed; how an issue is framed can significantly
affect decisions and judgments. 

fraternal twins twins who develop from separate (dizygotic) fertilized
eggs. They are genetically no closer than brothers and sisters, but
they share a fetal environment. 

free association in psychoanalysis, a method of exploring the unconscious
in which the person relaxes and says whatever comes to mind,
no matter how trivial or embarrassing. 

frequency the number of complete wavelengths that pass a point in a
given time (for example, per second). 

frequency theory in hearing, the theory that the rate of nerve impulses
traveling up the auditory nerve matches the frequency of a tone,
thus enabling us to sense its pitch. 

frontal lobes portion of the cerebral cortex lying just behind the forehead;
involved in speaking and muscle movements and in making
plans and judgments. 

frustration-aggression principle the principle that frustration—the
blocking of an attempt to achieve some goal—creates anger, which
can generate aggression. 

fundamental attribution error the tendency for observers, when analyzing
another's behavior, to underestimate the impact of the situation
and to overestimate the impact of personal disposition. 

gate-control theory the theory that the spinal cord contains a neurological
"gate" that blocks pain signals or allows them to pass on to
the brain. The "gate" is opened by the activity of pain signals traveling
up small nerve fibers and is closed by activity in larger fibers or
by information coming from the brain. 

gender in psychology, the biologically and socially influenced characteristics
by which people define male and female. 

gender identity our sense of being male or female. 

gender role a set of expected behaviors for males or for females. 

gender-typing the acquisition of a traditional masculine or feminine
role. 

general adaptation syndrome (GAS) Selye's concept of the body's
adaptive response to stress in three phases—alarm, resistance, exhaustion.

general intelligence (g) a general intelligence factor that, according
to Spearman and others, underlies specific mental abilities and is
therefore measured by every task on an intelligence test. 

generalization the tendency, once a response has been conditioned,
for stimuli similar to the conditioned stimulus to elicit similar responses.

generalized anxiety disorder an anxiety disorder in which a person is
continually tense, apprehensive, and in a state of autonomic nervous
system arousal.

industrial-organizational (I/O) psychology the application of psychological
concepts and methods to optimizing human behavior in
workplaces. 

informational social influence influence resulting from one's willingness
to accept others' opinions about reality. 

informed consent an ethical principle that research participants be
told enough to enable them to choose whether they wish to participate.

ingroup "Us"—people with whom we share a common identity. 

ingroup bias the tendency to favor our own group. 

inner ear the innermost part of the ear, containing the cochlea, semicircular
canals, and vestibular sacs. 

insight a sudden realization of a problem's solution; contrasts with
strategy-based solutions. 

insight therapies a variety of therapies that aim to improve psychological
functioning by increasing the client's awareness of underlying
motives and defenses. 

insomnia recurring problems in falling or staying asleep. 

instinct a complex behavior that is rigidly patterned throughout a species
and is unlearned. 

intellectual disability a condition of limited mental ability, indicated
by an intelligence score of 70 or below and difficulty in adapting
to the demands of life; varies from mild to profound. (Formerly referred
to as mental retardation.) 

intelligence mental quality consisting of the ability to learn from experience,
solve problems, and use knowledge to adapt to new situations.

intelligence quotient (IQ) defined originally as the ratio of mental
age (ma) to chronological age (ca) multiplied by 100 (thus,
IQ = ma/ca × 100). On contemporary intelligence tests, the average
performance for a given age is assigned a score of 100.

intelligence test a method for assessing an individual's mental aptitudes
and comparing them with those of others, using numerical
scores. 

intensity the amount of energy in a light or sound wave, which we
perceive as brightness or loudness, as determined by the wave's amplitude.

interaction the interplay that occurs when the effect of one factor
(such as environment) depends on another factor (such as heredity).

internal locus of control the perception that you control your own
fate. 

interneurons neurons within the brain and spinal cord that communicate
internally and intervene between the sensory inputs and motor
outputs. 

interpretation in psychoanalysis, the analyst's noting supposed dream
meanings, resistances, and other significant behaviors and events in
order to promote insight. 

intimacy in Erikson's theory, the ability to form close, loving relationships;
a primary developmental task in late adolescence and early
adulthood. 

intrinsic motivation a desire to perform a behavior effectively for its
own sake. 

homeostasis a tendency to maintain a balanced or constant internal
state; the regulation of any aspect of body chemistry, such as blood
glucose, around a particular level. 

hormones chemical messengers that are manufactured by the endocrine
glands, travel through the bloodstream, and affect other tissues.

hue the dimension of color that is determined by the wavelength of
light; what we know as the color names blue, green, and so forth.

human factors psychology a subfield of I/O psychology that explores
how people and machines interact and how machines and physical
environments can be made safe and easy to use. 

humanistic psychology historically significant perspective that emphasized
the growth potential of healthy people and the individual's
potential for personal growth. 

humanistic theories view personality with a focus on the potential for
healthy personal growth. 

hypnosis a social interaction in which one person (the hypnotist)
suggests to another (the subject) that certain perceptions, feelings,
thoughts, or behaviors will spontaneously occur. 

hypothalamus [hi-po-THAL-uh-muss] a neural structure lying below
(hypo) the thalamus; it directs several maintenance activities (eating,
drinking, body temperature), helps govern the endocrine system
via the pituitary gland, and is linked to emotion and reward.

hypothesis a testable prediction, often implied by a theory. 

iconic memory a momentary sensory memory of visual stimuli; a
photographic or picture-image memory lasting no more than a few
tenths of a second. 

id a reservoir of unconscious psychic energy that, according to
Freud, strives to satisfy basic sexual and aggressive drives. The id
operates on the pleasure principle, demanding immediate gratification.

identical twins twins who develop from a single (monozygotic) fertilized
egg that splits in two, creating two genetically identical organisms.

identification the process by which, according to Freud, children incorporate
their parents' values into their developing superegos. 

identity our sense of self; according to Erikson, the adolescent's task
is to solidify a sense of self by testing and integrating various roles.

implicit memory retention independent of conscious recollection.
(Also called nondeclarative memory.) 

imprinting the process by which certain animals form attachments
during a critical period very early in life. 

inattentional blindness failing to see visible objects when our attention
is directed elsewhere. 

incentive a positive or negative environmental stimulus that motivates
behavior. 

independent variable the experimental factor that is manipulated; the
variable whose effect is being studied. 

individualism giving priority to one's own goals over group goals and
defining one's identity in terms of personal attributes rather than
group identifications. 

lymphocytes the two types of white blood cells that are part of the
body's immune system: B lymphocytes form in the bone marrow and
release antibodies that fight bacterial infections; T lymphocytes form
in the thymus and other lymphatic tissue and attack cancer cells,
viruses, and foreign substances. 

major depressive disorder a mood disorder in which a person experiences,
in the absence of drugs or another medical condition, two or
more weeks of significantly depressed moods or diminished interest
or pleasure in most activities, along with at least four other symptoms.

mania a mood disorder marked by a hyperactive, wildly optimistic
state. 

manifest content according to Freud, the remembered story line of a
dream (as distinct from its latent, or hidden, content). 

maturation biological growth processes that enable orderly changes in
behavior, relatively uninfluenced by experience. 

mean the arithmetic average of a distribution, obtained by adding the
scores and then dividing by the number of scores. 

median the middle score in a distribution; half the scores are above it
and half are below it. 

medical model the concept that diseases, in this case psychological
disorders, have physical causes that can be diagnosed, treated, and,
in most cases, cured, often through treatment in a hospital. 

medulla [muh-DUL-uh] the base of the brainstem; controls heartbeat
and breathing. 

memory the persistence of learning over time through the storage and
retrieval of information. 

menarche [meh-NAR-key] the first menstrual period. 

menopause the time of natural cessation of menstruation; also refers
to the biological changes a woman experiences as her ability to reproduce
declines. 

mental age a measure of intelligence test performance devised by
Binet; the chronological age that most typically corresponds to a
given level of performance. Thus, a child who does as well as the
average 8-year-old is said to have a mental age of 8. 

mental set a tendency to approach a problem in one particular way,
often a way that has been successful in the past. 

mere exposure effect the phenomenon that repeated exposure to
novel stimuli increases liking of them. 

meta-analysis a procedure for statistically combining the results of
many different research studies. 

methamphetamine a powerfully addictive drug that stimulates the
central nervous system, with speeded-up body functions and associated
energy and mood changes; over time, appears to reduce baseline
dopamine levels. 

middle ear the chamber between the eardrum and cochlea containing
three tiny bones (hammer, anvil, and stirrup) that concentrate
the vibrations of the eardrum on the cochlea's oval
window. 

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) the most
widely researched and clinically used of all personality tests. Originally
developed to identify emotional disorders (still considered its
most appropriate use), this test is now used for many other screening
purposes. 

intuition an effortless, immediate, automatic feeling or thought, as
contrasted with explicit, conscious reasoning. 

iris a ring of muscle tissue that forms the colored portion of the eye
around the pupil and controls the size of the pupil opening. 

James-Lange theory the theory that our experience of emotion is our
awareness of our physiological responses to emotion-arousing stimuli.

just-world phenomenon the tendency for people to believe the world
is just and that people therefore get what they deserve and deserve
what they get. 

kinesthesis [kin-ehs-THEE-sehs] the system for sensing the position
and movement of individual body parts. 

language our spoken, written, or signed words and the ways we combine
them to communicate meaning. 

latent content according to Freud, the underlying meaning of a dream
(as distinct from its manifest content). 

latent learning learning that occurs but is not apparent until there is
an incentive to demonstrate it. 

law of effect Thorndike's principle that behaviors followed by favorable
consequences become more likely, and that behaviors followed
by unfavorable consequences become less likely. 

learned helplessness the hopelessness and passive resignation an animal
or human learns when unable to avoid repeated aversive events.

learning the process of acquiring new and relatively enduring information
or behaviors. 

lens the transparent structure behind the pupil that changes shape to
help focus images on the retina. 

lesion [LEE-zhuhn] tissue destruction. A brain lesion is a naturally or
experimentally caused destruction of brain tissue. 

levels of analysis the differing complementary views, from biological
to psychological to social-cultural, for analyzing any given phenomenon.

limbic system neural system (including the hippocampus, amygdala,
and hypothalamus) located below the cerebral hemispheres; associated
with emotions and drives. 

linguistic determinism Whorf's hypothesis that language determines
the way we think. 

lobotomy a psychosurgical procedure once used to calm uncontrollably
emotional or violent patients. The procedure cut the nerves
connecting the frontal lobes to the emotion-controlling centers of
the inner brain. 

longitudinal study research in which the same people are restudied
and retested over a long period. 

long-term memory the relatively permanent and limitless storehouse
of the memory system. Includes knowledge, skills, and experiences.

long-term potentiation (LTP) an increase in a cell's firing potential
after brief, rapid stimulation. Believed to be a neural basis for learning
and memory. 

LSD a powerful hallucinogenic drug; also known as acid (lysergic acid
diethylamide). 

near-death experience an altered state of consciousness reported after
a close brush with death (such as through cardiac arrest); often similar
to drug-induced hallucinations. 

negative reinforcement increasing behaviors by stopping or reducing
negative stimuli. A negative reinforcer is any stimulus that, when
removed after a response, strengthens the response. (Note: negative
reinforcement is not punishment.) 

nerves bundled axons that form neural "cables" connecting the central
nervous system with muscles, glands, and sense organs. 

nervous system the body's speedy, electrochemical communication
network, consisting of all the nerve cells of the peripheral and central
nervous systems. 

neurogenesis the formation of new neurons. 

neuron a nerve cell; the basic building block of the nervous system.

neurotransmitters chemical messengers that cross the synaptic gaps
between neurons. When released by the sending neuron, neurotransmitters
travel across the synapse and bind to receptor sites on
the receiving neuron, thereby influencing whether that neuron will
generate a neural impulse. 

neutral stimulus (NS) in classical conditioning, a stimulus that elicits
no response before conditioning. 

nicotine a stimulating and highly addictive psychoactive drug in tobacco.

night terrors a sleep disorder characterized by high arousal and an appearance
of being terrified; unlike nightmares, night terrors occur
during NREM-3 sleep, within two or three hours of falling asleep,
and are seldom remembered. 

norm an understood rule for accepted and expected behavior. Norms
prescribe "proper" behavior. 

normal curve (normal distribution) a symmetrical, bell-shaped curve
that describes the distribution of many types of data; most scores
fall near the mean, or average (about 68 percent fall within one
standard deviation of it) and fewer and fewer near the extremes.

normative social influence influence resulting from a person's desire
to gain approval or avoid disapproval. 

object permanence the awareness that things continue to exist even
when not perceived. 

observational learning learning by observing others. 

obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) an anxiety disorder characterized
by unwanted repetitive thoughts (obsessions) and/or actions
(compulsions). 

occipital [ahk-SIP-uh-tuhl] lobes portion of the cerebral cortex lying
at the back of the head; includes areas that receive information from
the visual fields. 

Oedipus [ED-uh-puss] complex according to Freud, a boy's sexual desires
toward his mother and feelings of jealousy and hatred for the
rival father. 

one-word stage the stage in speech development, from about age 1 to
2, during which a child speaks mostly in single words. 

operant behavior behavior that operates on the environment, producing
consequences. 

mirror neurons frontal lobe neurons that fire when performing
certain actions or when observing another doing so. The brain's
mirroring of another's action may enable imitation and empathy.

mirror-image perceptions mutual views often held by conflicting
people, as when each side sees itself as ethical and peaceful and
views the other side as evil and aggressive. 

misinformation effect incorporating misleading information into
one's memory of an event. 

mnemonics [nih-MON-iks] memory aids, especially those techniques
that use vivid imagery and organizational devices. 

mode the most frequently occurring score(s) in a distribution. 

modeling the process of observing and imitating a specific behavior.

molecular genetics the subfield of biology that studies the molecular
structure and function of genes. 

monocular cues depth cues, such as interposition and linear perspective,
available to either eye alone. 

mood disorders psychological disorders characterized by emotional
extremes. See major depressive disorder, mania, and bipolar disorder.

mood-congruent memory the tendency to recall experiences that are
consistent with one's current good or bad mood. 

morpheme in a language, the smallest unit that carries meaning; may
be a word or a part of a word (such as a prefix). 

motivation a need or desire that energizes and directs behavior. 

motor cortex an area at the rear of the frontal lobes that controls voluntary
movements. 

motor neurons neurons that carry outgoing information from the
brain and spinal cord to the muscles and glands. 

MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) a technique that uses magnetic
fields and radio waves to produce computer-generated images of soft
tissue. MRI scans show brain anatomy. 

mutation a random error in gene replication that leads to a change.

myelin [MY-uh-lin] sheath a fatty tissue layer segmentally encasing
the axons of some neurons; enables vastly greater transmission speed
as neural impulses hop from one node to the next. 

narcissism excessive self-love and self-absorption. 

narcolepsy a sleep disorder characterized by uncontrollable sleep attacks.
The sufferer may lapse directly into REM sleep, often at inopportune
times. 

natural selection the principle that, among the range of inherited trait
variations, those contributing to reproduction and survival will most
likely be passed on to succeeding generations. 

naturalistic observation observing and recording behavior in naturally
occurring situations without trying to manipulate and control
the situation. 

nature-nurture issue the longstanding controversy over the relative
contributions that genes and experience make to the development
of psychological traits and behaviors. Today's science
sees traits and behaviors arising from the interaction of nature
and nurture. 

perceptual constancy perceiving objects as unchanging (having consistent
shapes, size, brightness, and color) even as illumination and
retinal images change. 

perceptual set a mental predisposition to perceive one thing and not
another. 

peripheral nervous system (PNS) the sensory and motor neurons that
connect the central nervous system (CNS) to the rest of the body.

peripheral route persuasion occurs when people are influenced by
incidental cues, such as a speaker's attractiveness. 

personal control the extent to which people perceive control over
their environment rather than feeling helpless. 

personality disorders psychological disorders characterized by inflexible
and enduring behavior patterns that impair social functioning.

personality inventory a questionnaire (often with true-false or agreedisagree
items) on which people respond to items designed to gauge
a wide range of feelings and behaviors; used to assess selected personality
traits. 

personality an individual's characteristic pattern of thinking, feeling,
and acting. 

personnel psychology a subfield of I/O psychology that focuses on employee
recruitment, selection, placement, training, appraisal, and
development. 

PET (positron emission tomography) scan a visual display of brain
activity that detects where a radioactive form of glucose goes while
the brain performs a given task. 

phi phenomenon an illusion of movement created when two or more
adjacent lights blink on and off in quick succession. 

phobia an anxiety disorder marked by a persistent, irrational fear and
avoidance of a specific object, activity, or situation. 

phoneme in a language, the smallest distinctive sound unit. 

physical dependence a physiological need for a drug, marked by unpleasant
withdrawal symptoms when the drug is discontinued. 

pitch a tone's experienced highness or lowness; depends on frequency.

pituitary gland the endocrine system's most influential gland. Under
the influence of the hypothalamus, the pituitary regulates growth
and controls other endocrine glands. 

place theory in hearing, the theory that links the pitch we hear with
the place where the cochlea's membrane is stimulated. 

placebo [pluh-SEE-bo] effect Latin for "I shall please;" experimental
results caused by expectations alone; any effect on behavior caused
by the administration of an inert substance or condition, which the
recipient assumes is an active agent. 

plasticity the brain's ability to change, especially during childhood,
by reorganizing after damage or by building new pathways based on
experience. 

polygraph a machine, commonly used in attempts to detect lies, that
measures several of the physiological responses (such as perspiration
and cardiovascular and breathing changes) accompanying emotion.

population all the cases in a group being studied, from which samples
may be drawn. (Note: Except for national studies, this does not refer
to a country's whole population.) 

operant chamber in operant conditioning research, a chamber (also
known as a Skinner box) containing a bar or key that an animal can
manipulate to obtain a food or water reinforcer; attached devices record
the animal's rate of bar pressing or key pecking. 

operant conditioning a type of learning in which behavior is strengthened
if followed by a reinforcer or diminished if followed by a punisher.

operational definition a statement of the procedures (operations) used
to define research variables. For example, human intelligence may be
operationally defined as "what an intelligence test measures." 

opiates opium and its derivatives, such as morphine and heroin; they depress
neural activity, temporarily lessening pain and anxiety. 

opponent-process theory the theory that opposing retinal processes
(red-green, yellow-blue, white-black) enable color vision. For example,
some cells are stimulated by green and inhibited by red; others
are stimulated by red and inhibited by green. 

optic nerve the nerve that carries neural impulses from the eye to the
brain. 

organizational psychology a subfield of I/O psychology that examines
organizational influences on worker satisfaction and productivity
and facilitates organizational change. 

other-race effect the tendency to recall faces of one's own race more
accurately than faces of other races. Also called the cross-race effect
and the own-race bias. 

outgroup "Them"—those perceived as different or apart from our ingroup.

overconfidence the tendency to be more confident than correct—to
overestimate the accuracy of our beliefs and judgments. 

panic disorder an anxiety disorder marked by unpredictable, minuteslong
episodes of intense dread in which a person experiences terror
and accompanying chest pain, choking, or other frightening sensations.

parallel processing the processing of many aspects of a problem simultaneously;
the brain's natural mode of information processing
for many functions, including vision. Contrasts with the step-by-step
(serial) processing of most computers and of conscious problem solving.

parapsychology the study of paranormal phenomena, including ESP
and psychokinesis. 

parasympathetic nervous system the division of the autonomic nervous
system that calms the body, conserving its energy. 

parietal [puh-RYE-uh-tuhl] lobes portion of the cerebral cortex lying
at the top of the head and toward the rear; receives sensory input for
touch and body position. 

partial (intermittent) reinforcement reinforcing a response only part
of the time; results in slower acquisition of a response but much
greater resistance to extinction than does continuous reinforcement.

passionate love an aroused state of intense positive absorption in another,
usually present at the beginning of a love relationship. 

perception the process of organizing and interpreting sensory information,
enabling us to recognize meaningful objects and events. 

perceptual adaptation in vision, the ability to adjust to an artificially
displaced or even inverted visual field. 

psychoanalysis (1) Sigmund Freud's theory of personality that attributes
thoughts and actions to unconscious motives and conflicts;
(2) Freud's therapeutic technique used in treating psychological
disorders. Freud believed that the patient's free associations, resistances,
dreams, and transferences—and the therapist's interpretations
of them—released previously repressed feelings, allowing the
patient to gain self-insight. 

psychodynamic theories view personality with a focus on the unconscious
and the importance of childhood experiences. 

psychodynamic therapy therapy deriving from the psychoanalytic
tradition that views individuals as responding to unconscious forces
and childhood experiences, and that seeks to enhance self-insight.

psychological dependence a psychological need to use a drug, such as
to relieve negative emotions. 

psychological disorder deviant, distressful, and dysfunctional patterns
of thoughts, feelings, or behaviors. 

psychology the science of behavior and mental processes. 

psychoneuroimmunology the study of how psychological, neural, and
endocrine processes together affect the immune system and resulting
health. 

psychopharmacology the study of the effects of drugs on mind and
behavior. 

psychophysics the study of relationships between the physical characteristics
of stimuli, such as their intensity, and our psychological
experience of them. 

psychophysiological illness literally, "mind-body" illness; any stressrelated
physical illness, such as hypertension and some headaches.

psychosexual stages the childhood stages of development (oral, anal,
phallic, latency, genital) during which, according to Freud, the id's
pleasure-seeking energies focus on distinct erogenous zones. 

psychosis a psychological disorder in which a person loses contact
with reality, experiencing irrational ideas and distorted perceptions.

psychosurgery surgery that removes or destroys brain tissue in an effort
to change behavior. 

psychotherapy treatment involving psychological techniques; consists
of interactions between a trained therapist and someone seeking
to overcome psychological difficulties or achieve personal
growth. 

puberty the period of sexual maturation, during which a person becomes
capable of reproducing. 

punishment an event that tends to decrease the behavior that it follows.

pupil the adjustable opening in the center of the eye through which
light enters. 

random assignment assigning participants to experimental and control
groups by chance, thus minimizing preexisting differences between
those assigned to the different groups. 

random sample a sample that fairly represents a population because
each member has an equal chance of inclusion. 

range the difference between the highest and lowest scores in a distribution.

positive psychology the scientific study of human functioning, with
the goals of discovering and promoting strengths and virtues that
help individuals and communities to thrive. 

positive reinforcement increasing behaviors by presenting positive reinforcers.
A positive reinforcer is any stimulus that, when presented
after a response, strengthens the response. 

posthypnotic suggestion a suggestion, made during a hypnosis session,
to be carried out after the subject is no longer hypnotized; used
by some clinicians to help control undesired symptoms and behaviors.

post-traumatic growth positive psychological changes as a result of struggling
with extremely challenging circumstances and life crises. 

post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) an anxiety disorder characterized
by haunting memories, nightmares, social withdrawal, jumpy
anxiety, and/or insomnia that lingers for four weeks or more after a
traumatic experience. 

predictive validity the success with which a test predicts the behavior
it is designed to predict; it is assessed by computing the correlation
between test scores and the criterion behavior. (Also called criterionrelated
validity.) 

prejudice an unjustifiable (and usually negative) attitude toward a
group and its members. Prejudice generally involves stereotyped
beliefs, negative feelings, and a predisposition to discriminatory action.

preoperational stage in Piaget's theory, the stage (from about 2 to
about 6 or 7 years of age) during which a child learns to use language
but does not yet comprehend the mental operations of concrete
logic. 

primary reinforcer an innately reinforcing stimulus, such as one that
satisfies a biological need. 

primary sex characteristics the body structures (ovaries, testes,
and external genitalia) that make sexual reproduction possible.

priming the activation, often unconsciously, of certain associations, thus
predisposing one's perception, memory, or response. 

proactive interference the disruptive effect of prior learning on the
recall of new information. 

problem-focused coping attempting to alleviate stress directly—
by changing the stressor or the way we interact with that stressor.

projective test a personality test, such as the Rorschach, that provides
ambiguous stimuli designed to trigger projection of one's inner dynamics.

prosocial behavior positive, constructive, helpful behavior. The opposite
of antisocial behavior. 

prototype a mental image or best example of a category. Matching
new items to a prototype provides a quick and easy method for sorting
items into categories (as when comparing feathered creatures to
a prototypical bird, such as a robin). 

psychiatry a branch of medicine dealing with psychological disorders;
practiced by physicians who sometimes provide medical (for example,
drug) treatments as well as psychological therapy. 

psychoactive drug a chemical substance that alters perceptions and
moods. 

retina the light-sensitive inner surface of the eye, containing the receptor
rods and cones plus layers of neurons that begin the processing
of visual information. 

retinal disparity a binocular cue for perceiving depth: By comparing
images from the retinas in the two eyes, the brain computes distance—the
greater the disparity (difference) between the two images,
the closer the object. 

retrieval the process of getting information out of memory storage.

retroactive interference the disruptive effect of new learning on the
recall of old information. 

retrograde amnesia an inability to retrieve information from one's
past. 

reuptake a neurotransmitter's reabsorption by the sending neuron. 

rods retinal receptors that detect black, white, and gray; necessary for
peripheral and twilight vision, when cones don't respond. 

role a set of expectations (norms) about a social position, defining how
those in the position ought to behave. 

Rorschach inkblot test the most widely used projective test, a set of 10
inkblots, designed by Hermann Rorschach; seeks to identify people's
inner feelings by analyzing their interpretations of the blots. 

savant syndrome a condition in which a person otherwise limited in
mental ability has an exceptional specific skill, such as in computation
or drawing. 

scapegoat theory the theory that prejudice offers an outlet for anger by
providing someone to blame. 

scatterplot a graphed cluster of dots, each of which represents the values
of two variables. The slope of the points suggests the direction
of the relationship between the two variables. The amount of scatter
suggests the strength of the correlation (little scatter indicates high
correlation). 

schema a concept or framework that organizes and interprets information.

schizophrenia a group of severe disorders characterized by disorganized
and delusional thinking, disturbed perceptions, and inappropriate
emotions and behaviors. 

secondary sex characteristics nonreproductive sexual characteristics,
such as female breasts and hips, male voice quality, and body hair.

selective attention the focusing of conscious awareness on a particular
stimulus. 

self in contemporary psychology, assumed to be the center of personality,
the organizer of our thoughts, feelings, and actions. 

self-actualization according to Maslow, one of the ultimate psychological
needs that arises after basic physical and psychological needs
are met and self-esteem is achieved; the motivation to fulfill one's
potential. 

self-concept all our thoughts and feelings about ourselves, in answer to
the question, "Who am I?" 

self-control the ability to control impulses and delay short-term gratification
for greater long-term rewards. 

self-disclosure revealing intimate aspects of oneself to others. 

self-esteem one's feelings of high or low self-worth. 

rational-emotive behavior therapy (REBT) a confrontational
cognitive therapy, developed by Albert Ellis, that vigorously
challenges people's illogical, self-defeating attitudes and assumptions.

recall a measure of memory in which the person must retrieve information
learned earlier, as on a fill-in-the-blank test. 

reciprocal determinism the interacting influences of behavior, internal
cognition, and environment. 

reciprocity norm an expectation that people will help, not hurt, those
who have helped them. 

recognition a measure of memory in which the person need only identify
items previously learned, as on a multiple-choice test. 

reflex a simple, automatic response to a sensory stimulus, such as the
knee-jerk response. 

refractory period a resting period after orgasm, during which a man
cannot achieve another orgasm. 

regression toward the mean the tendency for extreme or unusual
scores to fall back (regress) toward their average. 

reinforcement in operant conditioning, any event that strengthens the
behavior it follows. 

reinforcement schedule a pattern that defines how often a desired response
will be reinforced. 

relative deprivation the perception that one is worse off relative to
those with whom one compares oneself. 

relearning a measure of memory that assesses the amount of time
saved when learning material for a second time. 

reliability the extent to which a test yields consistent results, as assessed
by the consistency of scores on two halves of the test, or on
retesting. 

REM rebound the tendency for REM sleep to increase following
REM sleep deprivation (created by repeated awakenings during
REM sleep). 

REM sleep rapid eye movement sleep, a recurring sleep stage during
which vivid dreams commonly occur. Also known as paradoxical
sleep, because the muscles are relaxed (except for minor twitches)
but other body systems are active. 

repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) the application
of repeated pulses of magnetic energy to the brain; used to stimulate
or suppress brain activity. 

replication repeating the essence of a research study, usually with different
participants in different situations, to see whether the basic
finding extends to other participants and circumstances. 

repression in psychoanalytic theory, the basic defense mechanism that
banishes anxiety-arousing thoughts, feelings, and memories from
consciousness. 

resilience the personal strength that helps most people cope with
stress and recover from adversity and even trauma. 

resistance in psychoanalysis, the blocking from consciousness of
anxiety-laden material. 

respondent behavior behavior that occurs as an automatic response to
some stimulus. 

reticular formation a nerve network that travels through the brainstem
and plays an important role in controlling arousal. 

social exchange theory the theory that our social behavior is an exchange
process, the aim of which is to maximize benefits and minimize
costs. 

social facilitation stronger responses on simple or well-learned tasks in
the presence of others. 

social identity the "we" aspect of our self-concept; the part of our answer
to "Who am I?" that comes from our group memberships. 

social leadership group-oriented leadership that builds teamwork, mediates
conflict, and offers support. 

social learning theory the theory that we learn social behavior by observing
and imitating and by being rewarded or punished. 

social loafing the tendency for people in a group to exert less effort
when pooling their efforts toward attaining a common goal than
when individually accountable. 

social psychology the scientific study of how we think about, influence,
and relate to one another. 

social script culturally modeled guide for how to act in various situations.

social trap a situation in which the conflicting parties, by each rationally
pursuing their self-interest, become caught in mutually destructive
behavior. 

social-cognitive perspective views behavior as influenced by the interaction
between people's traits (including their thinking) and their
social context. 

social-responsibility norm an expectation that people will help those
dependent upon them. 

somatic nervous system the division of the peripheral nervous system
that controls the body's skeletal muscles. Also called the skeletal nervous
system. 

source amnesia attributing to the wrong source an event we have experienced,
heard about, read about, or imagined. (Also called source
misattribution.) Source amnesia, along with the misinformation effect,
is at the heart of many false memories. 

spacing effect the tendency for distributed study or practice to yield
better long-term retention than is achieved through massed study or
practice. 

split brain a condition resulting from surgery that isolates the brain's
two hemispheres by cutting the fibers (mainly those of the corpus
callosum) connecting them. 

spontaneous recovery the reappearance, after a pause, of an extinguished
conditioned response. 

spotlight effect overestimating others' noticing and evaluating our appearance,
performance, and blunders (as if we presume a spotlight
shines on us). 

SQ3R a study method incorporating five steps: Survey, Question,
Read, Retrieve, Review. 

standard deviation a computed measure of how much scores vary
around the mean score. 

standardization defining meaningful scores by comparison with the
performance of a pretested group. 

Stanford-Binet the widely used American revision (by Terman at
Stanford University) of Binet's original intelligence test. 

statistical significance a statistical statement of how likely it is that an
obtained result occurred by chance. 

self-serving bias a readiness to perceive oneself favorably. 

sensation the process by which our sensory receptors and nervous system
receive and represent stimulus energies from our environment.

sensorimotor stage in Piaget's theory, the stage (from birth to about 2
years of age) during which infants know the world mostly in terms of
their sensory impressions and motor activities. 

sensorineural hearing loss hearing loss caused by damage to the cochlea's
receptor cells or to the auditory nerves; also called nerve deafness.

sensory adaptation diminished sensitivity as a consequence of constant
stimulation. 

sensory cortex area at the front of the parietal lobes that registers and
processes body touch and movement sensations. 

sensory interaction the principle that one sense may influence another,
as when the smell of food influences its taste. 

sensory memory the immediate, very brief recording of sensory information
in the memory system. 

sensory neurons neurons that carry incoming information from the
sensory receptors to the brain and spinal cord. 

serial position effect our tendency to recall best the last and first items
in a list. 

set point the point at which an individual's "weight thermostat" is supposedly
set. When the body falls below this weight, an increase in hunger
and a lowered metabolic rate may act to restore the lost weight. 

sexual disorder a problem that consistently impairs sexual arousal or
functioning. 

sexual orientation an enduring sexual attraction toward members of
either one's own sex (homosexual orientation) or the other sex (heterosexual
orientation). 

sexual response cycle the four stages of sexual responding described
by Masters and Johnson—excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution.

shallow processing encoding on a basic level based on structure or appearance
of words. 

shaping an operant conditioning procedure in which reinforcers guide
behavior toward closer and closer approximations of the desired behavior.

short-term memory activated memory that holds a few items briefly,
such as the seven digits of a phone number while dialing, before the
information is stored or forgotten. 

signal detection theory a theory predicting how and when we detect
the presence of a faint stimulus (signal) amid background stimulation
(noise). Assumes there is no single absolute threshold and that
detection depends partly on a person's experience, expectations,
motivation, and alertness. 

sleep periodic, natural, reversible loss of consciousness—as distinct
from unconsciousness resulting from a coma, general anesthesia, or
hibernation.

sleep apnea a sleep disorder characterized by temporary cessations
of breathing during sleep and repeated momentary awakenings.

social clock the culturally preferred timing of social events such as
marriage, parenthood, and retirement. 

teratogens (literally, "monster maker") agents, such as chemicals and
viruses, that can reach the embryo or fetus during prenatal development
and cause harm. 

terror-management theory a theory of death-related anxiety; explores
people's emotional and behavioral responses to reminders of their
impending death. 

testing effect enhanced memory after retrieving, rather than simply
reading, information. Also sometimes referred to as a retrieval practice
effect or test-enhanced learning. 

testosterone the most important of the male sex hormones. Both males
and females have it, but the additional testosterone in males stimulates
the growth of the male sex organs in the fetus and the development
of the male sex characteristics during puberty. 

thalamus [THAL-uh-muss] the brain's sensory switchboard, located
on top of the brainstem; it directs messages to the sensory receiving
areas in the cortex and transmits replies to the cerebellum and
medulla. 

THC the major active ingredient in marijuana; triggers a variety of effects,
including mild hallucinations. 

theory an explanation using an integrated set of principles that organizes
observations and predicts behaviors or events. 

theory of mind people's ideas about their own and others' mental
states—about their feelings, perceptions, and thoughts, and the behaviors
these might predict. 

therapeutic alliance a bond of trust and mutual understanding between
a therapist and client, who work together constructively to
overcome the client's problem. 

threshold the level of stimulation required to trigger a neural impulse.

token economy an operant conditioning procedure in which people
earn a token of some sort for exhibiting a desired behavior and can
later exchange the tokens for various privileges or treats. 

tolerance the diminishing effect with regular use of the same dose of a
drug, requiring the user to take larger and larger doses before experiencing
the drug's effect. 

top-down processing information processing guided by higher-level
mental processes, as when we construct perceptions drawing on our
experience and expectations. 

trait a characteristic pattern of behavior or a disposition to feel and act,
as assessed by self-report inventories and peer reports. 

transduction conversion of one form of energy into another. In sensation,
the transforming of stimulus energies, such as sights, sounds,
and smells, into neural impulses our brain can interpret. 

transference in psychoanalysis, the patient's transfer to the analyst of
emotions linked with other relationships (such as love or hatred for
a parent). 

transgender an umbrella term describing people whose gender identity
or expression differs from that associated with their birth sex. 

two-factor theory the Schachter-Singer theory that to experience emotion
one must (1) be physically aroused and (2) cognitively label the
arousal. 

two-word stage beginning about age 2, the stage in speech development
during which a child speaks mostly in two-word statements.

stereotype a generalized (sometimes accurate but often overgeneralized)
belief about a group of people. 

stereotype threat a self-confirming concern that one will be evaluated
based on a negative stereotype. 

stimulants drugs (such as caffeine, nicotine, and the more powerful
amphetamines, cocaine, Ecstasy, and methamphetamine) that excite
neural activity and speed up body functions. 

stimulus any event or situation that evokes a response. 

storage the retention of encoded information over time. 

stranger anxiety the fear of strangers that infants commonly display,
beginning by about 8 months of age. 

stress the process by which we perceive and respond to certain
events, called stressors, that we appraise as threatening or challenging.

structured interviews interview process that asks the same job-relevant
questions of all applicants, each of whom is rated on established
scales. 

subjective well-being self-perceived happiness or satisfaction with
life. Used along with measures of objective well-being (for example,
physical and economic indicators) to evaluate people's quality of
life. 

subliminal below one's absolute threshold for conscious awareness.

superego the part of personality that, according to Freud, represents
internalized ideals and provides standards for judgment (the conscience)
and for future aspirations. 

superordinate goals shared goals that override differences among people
and require their cooperation. 

survey a technique for ascertaining the self-reported attitudes or behaviors
of a particular group, usually by questioning a representative,
random sample of the group. 

sympathetic nervous system the division of the autonomic nervous
system that arouses the body, mobilizing its energy in stressful situations.

synapse [SIN-aps] the junction between the axon tip of the sending
neuron and the dendrite or cell body of the receiving neuron. The
tiny gap at this junction is called the synaptic gap or synaptic cleft.

systematic desensitization a type of exposure therapy that associates
a pleasant relaxed state with gradually increasing anxiety-triggering
stimuli. Commonly used to treat phobias. 

task leadership goal-oriented leadership that sets standards, organizes
work, and focuses attention on goals. 

telegraphic speech early speech stage in which a child speaks like a
telegram—"go car"—using mostly nouns and verbs. 

temperament a person's characteristic emotional reactivity and intensity.

temporal lobes portion of the cerebral cortex lying roughly above the
ears; includes the auditory areas, each receiving information primarily
from the opposite ear. 

tend and befriend under stress, people (especially women) often provide
support to others (tend) and bond with and seek support from
others (befriend). 

Type A Friedman and Rosenman's term for competitive, hard-driving,
impatient, verbally aggressive, and anger-prone people. 

Type B Friedman and Rosenman's term for easygoing, relaxed people.

unconditional positive regard a caring, accepting, nonjudgmental
attitude, which Carl Rogers believed would help clients to develop
self-awareness and self-acceptance. 

unconditioned response (UR) in classical conditioning, an unlearned,
naturally occurring response (such as salivation) to an unconditioned
stimulus (US) (such as food in the mouth). 

unconditioned stimulus (US) in classical conditioning, a stimulus
that unconditionally—naturally and automatically—triggers a response
(UR). 

unconscious according to Freud, a reservoir of mostly unacceptable
thoughts, wishes, feelings, and memories. According to contemporary
psychologists, information processing of which we are unaware. 

validity the extent to which a test measures or predicts what it is supposed
to. (See also content validity and predictive validity.) 

variable-interval schedule in operant conditioning, a reinforcement
schedule that reinforces a response at unpredictable time intervals.

variable-ratio schedule in operant conditioning, a reinforcement
schedule that reinforces a response after an unpredictable number
of responses. 

vestibular sense the sense of body movement and position, including
the sense of balance. 

virtual reality exposure therapy an anxiety treatment that progressively
exposes people to electronic simulations of their greatest fears,
such as airplane flying, spiders, or public speaking. 

visual cliff a laboratory device for testing depth perception in infants
and young animals. 

wavelength the distance from the peak of one light or sound wave to the
peak of the next. Electromagnetic wavelengths vary from the short
blips of cosmic rays to the long pulses of radio transmission. 

Weber's law the principle that, to be perceived as different, two stimuli
must differ by a constant minimum percentage (rather than a constant
amount). 

Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) the WAIS is the most
widely used intelligence test; contains verbal and performance (nonverbal)
subtests. 

Wernicke's area controls language reception—a brain area involved in
language comprehension and expression; usually in the left temporal
lobe. 

withdrawal the discomfort and distress that follow discontinuing the
use of an addictive drug. 

working memory a newer understanding of short-term memory that
focuses on conscious, active processing of incoming auditory and
visual-spatial information, and of information retrieved from longterm
memory. 

X chromosome the sex chromosome found in both men and women.
Females have two X chromosomes; males have one. An X chromosome
from each parent produces a female child. 

Y chromosome the sex chromosome found only in males. When
paired with an X chromosome from the mother, it produces a male
child. 

Young-Helmholtz trichromatic (three-color) theory the theory that
the retina contains three different color receptors—one most sensitive
to red, one to green, one to blue—which, when stimulated in
combination, can produce the perception of any color. 

zygote the fertilized egg; it enters a 2-week period of rapid cell division
and develops into an embryo. 

genes the biochemical units of heredity that make up the chromosomes;
a segment of DNA capable of synthesizing a protein.

genome the complete instructions for making an organism, consisting
of all the genetic material in that organism’s chromosomes.

gestalt an organized whole. Gestalt psychologists emphasized our
tendency to integrate pieces of information into meaningful
wholes.